---
layout: post
title: "Two Sum"
date: 2020-08-28 15:52:08 +0800
categories: leetcode, hash tables
---

The problem:

> Given an array of integers nums and and integer target, return the indices of the two numbers such that they add up to target.

> You may assume that each input would have exactly one solution, and you may not use the same element twice.

> You can return the answer in any order.

**Example 1:**

    Input: nums = [2,7,11,15], target = 9
    Output: [0,1]
    Output: Because nums[0] + nums[1] == 9, we return [0, 1]

**Example 2:**

    Input: nums = [3,2,4], target = 6
    Output: [1,2]

**Example 3:**

    Input: nums = [3,3], target = 6
    Output: [0,1]

**First Attempt**

If we loop through the array, comparing the current element with all the other elements in the array, we can find the two elements that sum up to the target.

    function twoSum(nums, target) {
        let result = [];

        for (let i = 0; i < nums.length; i++) {
            for (let j = i + 1; j < nums.length; j++) {
                if(nums[i] + nums[j] === target) {
                result.push(i, j);
                break;
                }
            }
        }

        return result;
    }

Note that in the nested loop, j _always_ has to be one more than i because the same element cannot be used twice.

**Second Attempt**

Start with a left and a right side (start of array and end of array, respectively). Continuously move the right side towards the left. If the left and the right are equal, we've exhausted all posibilities. Increment the left side and reset the right.

    function twoSum(nums, target) {
        let result = [];
        let left = 0;
        let right = nums.length - 1;
        while(!found) {
            if(right === left) {
                left++;
                right = nums.length - 1;
            }
            if(nums[left] + nums[right] === target) {
                result.push(left, right);
                found = true;
            }
            right--;
        }
        return result;
    }

Unfortunately, this had a poor runtime as well (actually worse lol).

Upon doing some research, I discovered a better solution: _hash tables_.

Something I once heard someone say:

> Throwing a hash table at any problem will probably improve its time complexity

I don't know if that's neccessarily true, but it definitely helps in our situation.

It turns out that a hash table is the best way to preserve the mapping of each element in an array to its index. It also provides excellent lookup time - O(1)! Provided there are no hash collisions.

**Hash Table Solution**

    function twoSum(nums, target) {
        const map = {};

        for (let i = 0; i < nums.length; i++) {
            map[nums[i]] = i;
        }

        for (let i = 0; i < nums.length; i++) {
            let complement = target - nums[i];

            if(complement in map && map[complement] !== i) {
                return [map[complement], i];
            }
        }
    }

The key to the problem is this: we don't need to _sum_ every value. We can look for a value's _complement_ instead.

For example, given [3,2,4], target = 6, we start with 3. Its complement is target - 3, which equals 3. We look it up and it doesn't exist in the map, so we move to 2, whose complement is 4. We look it up in the map, and it exists. We're done!

On to the code.

First, we begin by defining a map. We loop through the values in the nums array, assigning each number as a key to the map, where the key contains the position of the number.

Then, we loop through the nums array again. We say that complement = target - nums[i]. We look for complement in the map, and if it exists, we return map[complement] (which, as established earlier on, is an index), as well as the current index.

One stumbling block I ran into - remember, we cannot reuse values! Thus, it's important to make sure that whatever's in the key-value pair is not the same as the current index we're on.

That's all for now. Hope you guys are staying safe through these times!

Peace!
